cat pride.txt | grep and
The Project Gutenberg eBook, Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen, Edited
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
Title: Pride and Prejudice
E-text prepared by Greg Weeks, Jon Hurst, Mary Meehan, and the Online
By the Author of "Sense and Sensibility."
"But it is," returned she; "for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she
"_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it."
by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came
down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much
to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be
or five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!"
_may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as
"I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go, or you may send
as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley might like you the best of the
"But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into
be for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go,
glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my
others; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so
all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of
"But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four
thousand a year come into the neighbourhood."
reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three and twenty years had
been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. _Her_ mind
was less difficult to develope. She was a woman of mean understanding,
little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented she
daughters married; its solace was visiting and news.
wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was
assemblies, and that Mrs. Long has promised to introduce him."
of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion
"No more have I," said Mr. Bennet; "and I am glad to find that you do
"Aye, so it is," cried her mother, "and Mrs. Long does not come back
"Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce
fortnight. But if _we_ do not venture, somebody else will; and after
all, Mrs. Long and her nieces must stand their chance; and therefore, as
you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on
Mary? for you are a young lady of deep reflection I know, and read great
books, and make extracts."
neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is such a
good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said
"Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you chuse," said Mr. Bennet; and,
return Mr. Bennet's visit, and determining when they should ask him to
husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him
in various ways; with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and
distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all; and they were at
last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour
delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
agreeable, and to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly
dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively
said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, "and all the others equally well
In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet's visit, and sat about ten
window, that he wore a blue coat and rode a black horse.
An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and already had
was obliged to be in town the following day, and consequently unable to
so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that
he might be always flying about from one place to another, and never
large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingley
was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly.
only six with him from London, his five sisters and a cousin. And when
altogether; Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and
Mr. Bingley was good looking and gentleman-like; he had a pleasant
countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women,
of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien; and
his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen
much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great
proud, to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all his
forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared
people in the room; he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,
was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one
themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced
only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being
introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
the world, and every body hoped that he would never come there again.
down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been
standing near enough for her to overhear a conversation between him and
standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better
would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not
stand up with."
life, as I have this evening; and there are several of them you see
"_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room," said Mr.
of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I
"Which do you mean?" and turning round, he looked for a moment at
Elizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew his own and coldly said,
"She is tolerable; but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; and I am in no
by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her
Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth
party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been
accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been
spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they
book he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a
she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with
twice; and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second
time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand
can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going
down the dance. So, he enquired who she was, and got introduced, and
King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane
again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the Boulanger----"
"If he had had any compassion for _me_," cried her husband impatiently,
is so excessively handsome! and his sisters are charming women. I never
of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and some
all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited that there was no enduring
him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very
great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my
When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in
humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners!--so much ease,
"He is also handsome," replied Elizabeth, "which a young man ought
us. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. What
very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a
You never see a fault in any body. All the world are good and agreeable
"I know you do; and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_
good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of
others! Affectation of candour is common enough;--one meets it every
where. But to be candid without ostentation or design--to take the good
of every body's character and make it still better, and say nothing of
converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother and keep
his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming
the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more
quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and
being agreeable where they chose it; but proud and conceited. They were
rather handsome, had been educated in one of the first private
seminaries in town, had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds, were in the
habit of spending more than they ought, and of associating with people
of rank; and were therefore in every respect entitled to think well of
themselves, and meanly of others. They were of a respectable family in
the north of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their
memories than that their brother's fortune and their own had been
thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an estate,
but did not live to do it.--Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and
good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those
remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to
look at Netherfield House. He did look at it and into it for half an
hour, was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms, satisfied
with what the owner said in its praise, and took it immediately.
Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of a
offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he never
firmest reliance, and of his judgment the highest opinion. In
understanding Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means deficient,
but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty, reserved, and
fastidious, and his manners, though well bred, were not inviting. In
girls in his life; every body had been most kind and attentive to him,
with all the room; and as to Miss Bennet, he could not conceive an angel
in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had
felt the smallest interest, and from none received either attention or
Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so--but still they admired
her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one whom
established as a sweet girl, and their brother felt authorised by such
in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune and risen to the
disgust to his business and to his residence in a small market town; and
could think with pleasure of his own importance, and unshackled by
friendly and obliging, his presentation at St. James's had made him
That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a
ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly
brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.
self-command to Miss Lucas. "_You_ were Mr. Bingley's first choice."
"Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson; did not
assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many pretty
women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and his
"Aye--because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he
every body says that he is ate up with pride, and I dare say he had
heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had come to
"That is very true," replied Elizabeth, "and I could easily forgive
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us
quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different
foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine every day."
Bennet; "and if I were to see you at it I should take away your bottle
would, and the argument ended only with the visit.
good will of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was
found to be intolerable and the younger sisters not worth speaking to, a
every body, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them;
generally evident whenever they met, that he _did_ admire her; and to
which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a
united with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and a
from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and
"But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavour to conceal
"Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But though Bingley and Jane
meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and as they
therefore make the most of every half hour in which she can command his
question but the desire of being well married; and if I were determined
to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. But
and has since dined in company with him four times. This is not quite
enough to make her understand his character."
remember that four evenings have been also spent together--and four
"Well," said Charlotte, "I wish Jane success with all my heart; and if
ever so similar before-hand, it does not advance their felicity in the
have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as
sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself."
ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But no
sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she had
in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and
pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those
himself agreeable no where, and who had not thought her handsome enough
He began to wish to know more of her, and as a step towards conversing
what he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by
turned to him and said,
to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows."
to play and sing before any body and every body!--If my vanity had taken
course familiar with--'Keep your breath to cool your porridge,'--and I
or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that she
the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always
Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her
application, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceited
had reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with
much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the
end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by
Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who with
some of the Lucases and two or three officers joined eagerly in dancing
passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too
"Certainly, Sir;--and it has the advantage also of being in vogue
continued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group;--"and I doubt
"Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Do
make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was
struck with the notion of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to
And taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy, who, though
drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William,
hand; but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at all
the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the
Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not
injured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some
in this manner--in such society; and indeed I am quite of your opinion.
I was never more annoyed! The insipidity and yet the noise; the
nothingness and yet the self-importance of all these people!--What would
Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he
How long has she been such a favourite?--and pray when am I to wish you
absolutely settled. You will have a charming mother-in-law, indeed, and
entertain herself in this manner, and as his composure convinced her
thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed in
default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother's
the deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and
had left her four thousand pounds.
father, and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in
thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and
Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions;
their minds were more vacant than their sisters', and when nothing
hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare of news
news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the
neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was the
officers' names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a secret,
and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr. Philips
visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a source of felicity
unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; and Mr.
Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect
indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter, and
their father and mother.--When they get to our age I dare say they will
liked a red coat myself very well--and indeed so I do still at my heart;
and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year, should
want one of my girls, I shall not say nay to him; and I thought Colonel
"Mama," cried Lydia, "my aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain
came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke's library."
note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited
for an answer. Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was
Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love."
"It is from Miss Bingley," said Jane, and then read it aloud.
     "If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and
     this. My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers.
rain; and then you must stay all night."
and the Hursts have no horses to theirs."
were engaged. Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her
     of his having been to me--and excepting a sore-throat and head-ache
Mr. Bingley, and under your orders."
there, it is all very well. I would go and see her, if I could have the
the carriage was not to be had; and as she was no horse-woman, walking
impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion,
"We will go as far as Meryton with you," said Catherine and
Lydia.--Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set
of the officers' wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing
field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing
over puddles with impatient activity, and finding herself at last within
view of the house, with weary ancles, dirty stockings, and a face
assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of
in such dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs.
Hurst and Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her
and in their brother's manners there was something better than
politeness; there was good humour and kindness.--Mr. Darcy said very
little, and Mr. Hurst nothing at all. The former was divided between
and doubt as to the occasion's justifying her coming so far alone. The
Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish and not well
immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving
however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left them together,
When breakfast was over, they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth
began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and
solicitude they shewed for Jane. The apothecary came, and having
violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;
advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advice
was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head
When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go; and very
unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she only
present. Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was
dispatched to Longbourn to acquaint the family with her stay, and bring
At five o'clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half past six
poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the
shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked
being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their
regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his
attentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented her feeling
engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr.
eat, drink, and play at cards, who when he found her prefer a plain dish
When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley
pronounced to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence;
thought the same, and added,
"Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep
in mud, I am absolutely certain; and the gown which had been let down to
"_You_ observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure," said Miss Bingley; "and I am
above her ancles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! what could she mean by
short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again.
girl, and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with such
a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is no
"Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside."
"That is capital," added her sister, and they both laughed heartily.
hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of
leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee.
She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till
late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her asleep, and
party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting
them to be playing high she declined it, and making her sister the
reader and has no pleasure in anything else."
_not_ a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things."
"In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure," said Bingley; "and
Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards a table
"And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own
credit; but I am an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have more
neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not a
finer county in England than Derbyshire."
attention for her book; and soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near
the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his eldest
so much. Such a countenance, such manners! and so extremely
"Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover skreens and net
purses. I scarcely know any one who cannot do all this, and I am sure I
dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and besides all
this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of
walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word
"All this she must possess," added Darcy, "and to all this she must yet
"_I_ never saw such a woman. _I_ never saw such capacity, and taste, and
application, and elegance, as you describe, united."
Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her
implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who
sex, by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, it
Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and
unwilling to comply with their brother's proposal; and it was settled
possible attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.
Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister's room, and in the
and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his
note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her
own judgment of her situation. The note was immediately dispatched, and
Bingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all
know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a
_her_. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect
"Whatever I do is done in a hurry," replied he; "and therefore if I
"Oh! yes--I understand you perfectly."
"Lizzy," cried her mother, "remember where you are, and do not run on in
and unvarying society."
Every body was surprised; and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment,
my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast deal
"When I am in the country," he replied, "I never wish to leave it; and
advantages, and I can be equally happy in either."
neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four and twenty families."
countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eye towards
genteel and so easy!--He has always something to say to every
body.--_That_ is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy
themselves very important and never open their mouths, quite mistake the
judge for themselves, and the Lucases are very good sort of girls, I
assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that _I_ think
has often said so, and envied me Jane's beauty. I do not like to boast
wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were."
Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth
speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs.
unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be
civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part
indeed without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and
each other during the whole visit, and the result of it was, that the
and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose
animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the
attentions of the officers, to whom her uncle's good dinners and her own
equal therefore to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and
"I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and when
wait till Jane was well, and by that time most likely Captain Carter
Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned
instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations' behaviour to the
remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,
The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss
continued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joined
Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching
the progress of his letter, and repeatedly calling off his attention by
messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and
Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in
attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual
commendations of the lady either on his hand-writing, or on the evenness
with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was
and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful
little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss
imaginable. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest."
humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an
thought and carelessness of execution, which if not estimable, you think
quickness is always much prized by the possessor, and often without any
panegyric, of compliment to yourself--and yet what is there so very
undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or any one else?"
believed what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this
dependant on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were
go--and, at another word, might stay a month."
circumstance I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I
which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, to stand
the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and the
"To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of
friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often make
thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend,
forgetting their comparative height and size; for that will have more
know a more aweful object than Darcy, on particular occasions, and in
particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening
rather offended; and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly
argument, and want to silence this."
"Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and Miss
thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me."
"What you ask," said Elizabeth, "is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr.
Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.
When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth
the piano-forte, and after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead
the way, which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she
Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister, and while they were thus employed
admiration to so great a man; and yet that he should look at her because
her more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than
lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near
delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of
you, that I do not want to dance a reel at all--and now despise me if
gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her
manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody; and Darcy had
Miss Bingley saw, or suspected enough to be jealous; and her great
their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.
and if you can compass it, do cure the younger girls of running after
check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence,
"Oh! yes.--Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Philips be
colour and shape, and the eye-lashes, so remarkably fine, might be
At that moment they were met from another walk, by Mrs. Hurst and
and immediately said,--
"No, no; stay where you are.--You are charmingly group'd, and appear to
and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the
professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable
entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh
Miss Bingley's eyes were instantly turned towards Darcy, and she had
also made her a slight bow, and said he was "very glad;" but diffuseness
and warmth remained for Bingley's salutation. He was full of joy and
should suffer from the change of room; and she removed at his desire to
door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to any one else.
Darcy did not wish for cards; and Mr. Hurst soon found even his open
petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and the
sophas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book; Miss Bingley did the same;
and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and
rings, joined now and then in her brother's conversation with Miss
Darcy's progress through _his_ book, as in reading her own; and she was
question, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be
second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, "How pleasant it
No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and
towards him and said,
before it begins--but as for the ball, it is quite a settled thing; and
Miss Bingley made no answer; and soon afterwards got up and walked about
the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well;--but Darcy, at
of her feelings she resolved on one effort more; and, turning to
"Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a
Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was
that he could imagine but two motives for their chusing to walk up and
be his meaning"--and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand
on us, and our surest way of disappointing him, will be to ask nothing
thing, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of his two
the evening because you are in each other's confidence and have secret
completely in your way;--and if the second, I can admire you much better
can all plague and punish one another. Teaze him--laugh at
yet taught me _that_. Teaze calmness of temper and presence of mind! No,
uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would
wisest and the best of men, nay, the wisest and best of their actions,
and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies _do_ divert me, I own, and I
understanding to ridicule."
"Such as vanity and pride."
Bingley;--"and pray what is the result?"
but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch
convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of
"And yours," he replied with a smile, "is wilfully to misunderstand
Her sister made not the smallest objection, and the piano-forte was
opened, and Darcy, after a few moments recollection, was not sorry for
before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley
and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very
resolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the
she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley's carriage immediately, and at
that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.
The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was
Jane; and till the morrow, their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was
then sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her jealousy and dislike
soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be
Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked--and Miss
Bingley was uncivil to _her_, and more teazing than usual to himself.
ten words to her through the whole of Saturday, and though they were at
conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.
very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,
see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most
tenderly, she even shook hands with the former.--Elizabeth took leave of
wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much
trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again.--But their
animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane and
They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough bass and human
nature; and had some new extracts to admire, and some new observations
of thread-bare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had
information for them of a different sort. Much had been done, and much
flogged, and it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going
unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in, and I hope _my_ dinners
"The person of whom I speak, is a gentleman and a stranger." Mrs.
Bennet's eyes sparkled.--"A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr. Bingley
"It is _not_ Mr. Bingley," said her husband; "it is a person whom I
This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being
eagerly questioned by his wife and five daughters at once.
"About a month ago I received this letter, and about a fortnight ago I
answered it, for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring
children; and I am sure if I had been you, I should have tried long ago
Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to her the nature of an entail.
Bennet was beyond the reach of reason; and she continued to rail
"It certainly is a most iniquitous affair," said Mr. Bennet, "and
"No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it was very impertinent of
him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false
     The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured
     father, always gave me much uneasiness, and since I have had the
     whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the valuable
     demean myself with grateful respect towards her Ladyship, and be
     ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are
     instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman, moreover, I
     feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in
     all families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds
     commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next in the
     and not lead you to reject the offered olive branch. I cannot be
     amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologise for it, as well as to
     you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o'clock, and
     your lady and daughters, your well-wisher and friend,
conscientious and polite young man, upon my word; and I doubt not will
"There is some sense in what he says about the girls however; and if he
Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying
reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his
To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any
come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had
and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure, which
astonished her husband and daughters.
Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great
ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need
heavy looking young man of five and twenty. His air was grave and
stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated
instance, fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did
"You are very kind, sir, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may
"I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins,--and
forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come
He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each
hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture were examined and praised;
and his commendation of every thing would have touched Mrs. Bennet's
own future property. The dinner too in its turn was highly admired; and
cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He begged
guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to
Catherine de Bourgh's attention to his wishes, and consideration for his
to more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspect
person of rank--such affability and condescension, as he had himself
and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of
marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had
approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed
"That is all very proper and civil, I am sure," said Mrs. Bennet, "and I
"The garden in which stands my humble abode, is separated only by a lane
"She has one only daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very
many girls. And what sort of young lady is she? is she handsome?"
handsomest of her sex; because there is that in her features which marks
informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still
resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends
to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies."
and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine myself one day, has deprived
with the idea, and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to
charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess, and that the most
her.--These are the kind of little things which please her ladyship, and
"You judge very properly," said Mr. Bennet, "and it is happy for you
"They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though I
sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant
as he had hoped, and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment,
and except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner in
By tea-time however the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was glad to
take his guest into the drawing-room again, and when tea was over, glad
and a book was produced; but on beholding it, (for every thing announced
it to be from a circulating library,) he started back, and begging
pardon, protested that he never read novels.--Kitty stared at him, and
Lydia exclaimed.--Other books were produced, and after some deliberation
he chose Fordyce's Sermons. Lydia gaped as he opened the volume, and
and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. My aunt told me so
about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town."
Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said,
Bennet and her daughters apologised most civilly for Lydia's
interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would
young cousin no ill will, and should never resent her behaviour as any
affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared
Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had
his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and
miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he
retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected
Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which he
felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness,
clergyman, and his rights as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of
pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.
Having now a good house and very sufficient income, he intended to
marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had
them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report.
estate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and
suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own
confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what
was due to seniority; and for the first evening _she_ was his settled
conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturally
Longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general
Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth--and it was soon
next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.
Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have
two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of
except Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them,
and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed
him after breakfast, and there he would continue, nominally engaged with
Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Such
always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told
Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room in the
walk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker
than a reader, was extremely well pleased to close his large book, and
In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his
were immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers,
and nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed, or a really new muslin
and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the stranger's air,
all wondered who he could be, and Kitty and Lydia, determined if
wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained
spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated permission to
before from town, and he was happy to say had accepted a commission in
countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address. The introduction
readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the
whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably,
when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley were
the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual
civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the
purpose to inquire after her. Mr. Darcy corroborated it with a bow, and
were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger, and Elizabeth
passed, took leave and rode on with his friend.
Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of
Mr. Philips's house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia's
pressing entreaties that they would come in, and even in spite of Mrs.
Philips' throwing up the parlour window, and loudly seconding the
Mrs. Philips was always glad to see her nieces, and the two eldest, from
their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and she was eagerly
by exclamations and inquiries about the other, of whom, however, she
brought him from London, and that he was to have a lieutenant's
she said, as he walked up and down the street, and had Mr. Wickham
appeared Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation,
next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr.
Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn
would come in the evening. This was agreed to, and Mrs. Philips
tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such
delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr.
Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured
Philips's manners and politeness. He protested that except Lady
Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman; for
aunt, and all Mr. Collins's scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for
conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and the
that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle's invitation, and was then in
When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr.
Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much
struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he
was, and who was its proprietor, when she had listened to the
description of only one of Lady Catherine's drawing-rooms, and found
the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison
In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion,
with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, and the
gentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. Philips a very attentive
heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as
and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine
gentlemen did approach; and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room,
gentleman-like set, and the best of them were of the present party; but
Mr. Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and
turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated
himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into
conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, and on the
With such rivals for the notice of the fair, as Mr. Wickham and the
kind listener in Mrs. Philips, and was, by her watchfulness, most
abundantly supplied with coffee and muffin.
Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he
received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there
and exclaiming after prizes, to have attention for any one in
particular. Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was
therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to
Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in
"About a month," said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject
understand."
thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person more capable of
four days in the same house with him, and I think him very
too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for _me_ to
astonish--and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly
world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his
high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chuses to be seen."
and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for
very great ill usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he is.
that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never be
thousand tender recollections. His behaviour to myself has been
scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him any thing and every
thing, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the memory
Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with
had yet seen, and speaking of the latter especially, with gentle but
"It was the prospect of constant society, and good society," he added,
most respectable, agreeable corps, and my friend Denny tempted me
farther by his account of their present quarters, and the very great
attentions and excellent acquaintance Meryton had procured them.
Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and
my spirits will not bear solitude. I _must_ have employment and society.
was brought up for the church, and I should at this time have been in
living in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.
and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given
conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim
was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no
any thing to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper, and I
may perhaps have sometimes spoken my opinion _of_ him, and _to_ him, too
different sort of men, and that he hates me."
Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer than
Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, "To
to the late Mr. Darcy, and devoted all his time to the care of the
and when immediately before my father's death, Mr. Darcy gave him a
be traced to pride;--and pride has often been his best friend. It has
of us consistent; and in his behaviour to me, there were stronger
"Yes. It has often led him to be liberal and generous,--to give his
money freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve
the poor. Family pride, and _filial_ pride, for he is very proud of what
which with _some_ brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and careful
guardian of his sister; and you will hear him generally cried up as the
most attentive and best of brothers."
very proud.--As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and
extremely fond of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her
amusement. But she is nothing to me now. She is a handsome girl, about
fifteen or sixteen, and I understand highly accomplished. Since her
and superintends her education."
After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not
help reverting once more to the first, and saying,
who seems good humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable,
sincere, rational, honourable, and perhaps agreeable,--allowing
something for fortune and figure."
the other table, and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin
Elizabeth and Mrs. Philips.--The usual inquiries as to his success were
that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged she would not
card table, they must take their chance of these things,--and happily I
Mr. Wickham's attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins for
"You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy
"Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is
believed that she and her cousin will unite the two estates."
Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless her
affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were already
"Mr. Collins," said she, "speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her
I suspect his gratitude misleads him, and that in spite of her being his
her, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has the
reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe
she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part from
her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride of her nephew, who
chuses that every one connected with him should have an understanding of
Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and
an end to cards; and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr.
body. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done
think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, all
talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and the
fish she had won, and Mr. Collins, in describing the civility of Mr. and
at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing
Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern;--she
Bingley's regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to question the
interest all her tender feelings; and nothing therefore remained to be
done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and
"Very true, indeed;--and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say in
they had been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their
their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and
and nothing at all to the others. They were soon gone again, rising from
their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and
compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered by
society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and
Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of every thing in Mr. Darcy's
looks and behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia,
Wickham, he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and
Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those who
consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for every
him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley's invitation, and if he
amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no
scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke
have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing myself
that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair cousins
in the course of the evening, and I take this opportunity of soliciting
cause, and not to any disrespect for her."
engaged by Wickham for those very dances:--and to have Mr. Collins
for it however. Mr. Wickham's happiness and her own was per force
delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins's proposal accepted with as
being the mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a
civilities toward herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a
compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than
her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage
consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and
If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the
improvement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than
a dance on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday and
Monday, endurable to Kitty and Lydia.
Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield and looked in
usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all
pleasure in the Bingleys' invitation to the officers; and though this
pronounced by his friend Mr. Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and
the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant
Elizabeth, and as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for
Wickham. She was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and
But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect
spirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she had
the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particular
they were dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn,
apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being
aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable
She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of
Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those dances
were over she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with
her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without
immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of
When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her
hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper not to be a
simpleton and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant
answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which
she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and
They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to
imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and at
some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again silent.
the dance, and _you_ ought to make some kind of remark on the size of
He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be
"Very well.--That reply will do for the present.--Perhaps by and bye I
entirely silent for half an hour together, and yet for the advantage of
something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to
He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down
the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often
walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resist
features, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herself
for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in a
with emphasis, "and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all
Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At
dancing and his partner.
disgrace you, and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated,
at her sister and Bingley,) shall take place. What congratulations will
William's allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his
eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Bingley and
he turned to his partner, and said,
success, and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine."
thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared
greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were
She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in
which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against
They had not long separated when Miss Bingley came towards her, and with
Wickham!--Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a
thousand questions; and I find that the young man forgot to tell you,
blame, that he cannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned, and that
most insolent thing indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it.
"His guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same," said
than of being the son of Mr. Darcy's steward, and of _that_, I can
nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr.
evening.--Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that moment
solicitude for Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and every thing
history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have
the probity and honour of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that
received; and I am sorry to say that by his account as well as his
afraid he has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy's
since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt
She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on
Bingley's regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence
partner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them and
this house the names of his cousin Miss de Bourgh, and of her mother
and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total
side, and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in
with the determined air of following his own inclination, and when she
understanding, but permit me to say that there must be a wide difference
between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity, and those
in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education and
reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at
a solemn bow, and though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if
hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words "apology,"
"Hunsford," and "Lady Catherine de Bourgh."--It vexed her to see him
wonder, and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him time to speak, replied
discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy's contempt seemed
abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and at the
end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. Mr.
me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying,
handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him."
her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley, and the
could bestow; and she felt capable under such circumstances, of
she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to
placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find
openly, and of nothing else but of her expectation that Jane would be
soon married to Mr. Bingley.--It was an animating subject, and Mrs.
the match. His being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living
and then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of
Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as
other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be
fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no
and blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently
of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and
At length however Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who
likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken.
tranquillity; for when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she
preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent
complaisance,--but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an
opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song.
Elizabeth's eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations; and she
her voice was weak, and her manner affected.--Elizabeth was in agonies.
talking to Bingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making
signs of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued however
and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud,
Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and
Elizabeth sorry for her, and sorry for her father's speech, was afraid
air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly
such an agreement for tythes as may be beneficial to himself and not
offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time
that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care
and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making
that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards every
spoken so sensibly, and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that
finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister
that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his
must have witnessed. That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should
have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations was bad enough, and
Mr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, and though he
power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with
somebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room.
her, and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her
her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and
though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite
probable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced in
The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart; and by a
heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her
sister scarcely opened their mouths except to complain of fatigue, and
every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and by so doing, threw a
long speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and his
sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and
Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together, a little detached from the
rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a
silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too
civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn; and
pleasure, and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of
Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied; and quitted the house under the
settlements, new carriages and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly
with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure.
Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the
man and the match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of each
was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.
his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having
Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon
upon Elizabeth's seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about
to escape, she added, "Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and hearing
Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction--and a moment's
over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again, and tried
between distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as
marrying--and moreover for coming into Hertfordshire with the design of
use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him farther, and
very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly--which perhaps I ought to have
mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and recommendation
subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I left
gentlewoman for _my_ sake; and for your _own_, let her be an active,
you can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.' Allow me, by the
way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice and
thing I can describe; and your wit and vivacity I think must be
acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect
for several years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and I
violence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and
shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well
aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds
therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself that
hand, "that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the
favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second or even a
said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long."
happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who
economy, and other amiable qualifications."
give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment of
believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by
refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise.
feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn
first application, and perhaps you have even now said as much to
believing it are briefly these:--It does not appear to me that my hand
with the family of De Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, are
circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into farther
effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must
again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but
gallantry; "and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express
reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, if he
in such a manner as must be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could
not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.
door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she
entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in
received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then
from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.
it, and could not help saying so.
a very headstrong foolish girl, and does not know her own interest; but
is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would
"Sir, you quite misunderstand me," said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. "Lizzy is
good natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and
husband, called out as she entered the library,
You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will
not have him, and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and
Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them
"I have not the pleasure of understanding you," said he, when she had
"Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins,
and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy."
Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the
you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has made
"Very well--and this offer of marriage you have refused?"
again if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again
but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the
"My dear," replied her husband, "I have two small favours to request.
First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the
present occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the
Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did
Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again;
coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane in
interfering;--and Elizabeth sometimes with real earnestness and
could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other
way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her
made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him."
who came to tell the same news, and no sooner had they entered the
the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating
Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.
as may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided
you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who is
you--and so I warn you.--I have done with you from this very day.--I
again, and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in
than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls,
"Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and
let Mr. Collins and me have a little conversation together."
Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but
Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte,
herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little
curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending
who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment; and I
positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I
daughter's favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the
consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my _manner_
The discussion of Mr. Collins's offer was now nearly at an end, and
attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusion of her mother.
stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke to
her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of
civility in listening to him, was a seasonable relief to them all, and
Saturday, and to Saturday he still meant to stay.
were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball.
He joined them on their entering the town and attended them to their
aunt's, where his regret and vexation, and the concern of every body was
many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes
She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a full
discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civilly
bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with
them to Longbourn, and during the walk, he particularly attended to her.
compliment it offered to herself, and it was most acceptable as an
occasion of introducing him to her father and mother.
from Netherfield, and was opened immediately. The envelope contained a
fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her sister's countenance change as
she read it, and saw her dwelling intently on some particular passages.
Jane recollected herself soon, and putting the letter away, tried to
even from Wickham; and no sooner had he and his companion taken leave,
good deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are
on their way to town; and without any intention of coming back again.
and of their meaning to dine that day in Grosvenor street, where Mr.
returns of the delightful intercourse we have known, and in the mean
while may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most
distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she
absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley's being there; and as
forward, may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful
are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when
the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your beaux
is impatient to see his sister, and to confess the truth, _we_ are
Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and the
affection she inspires in Louisa and myself, is heightened into
country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them
relations all wish the connection as much as his own, and a sister's
favour an attachment and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest
is perfectly convinced of her brother's indifference, and that if she
in love with you, and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him to
town in the hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he
this. We are not rich enough, or grand enough for them; and she is the
achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I
one; and all that I can hope in this case is, that she is deceived
You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer."
accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry
"You must decide for yourself," said Elizabeth, "and if upon mature
"I did not think you would;--and that being the case, I cannot consider
required. A thousand things may arise in six months!"
interested wishes, and she could not for a moment suppose that those
the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect.
Jane's temper was not desponding, and she was gradually led to hope,
Bingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart.
and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen
that Mr. Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn,
and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration that, though
The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases, and again during the
humour," said she, "and I am more obliged to you than I can express."
Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and
herself. Such was Miss Lucas's scheme; and appearances were so
But here, she did injustice to the fire and independence of his
morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw
conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known
secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging,
him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and instantly
to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.
thing was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as they
to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must be
continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and
Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent;
and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins's present
they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were
Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and Sir William gave it as his decided
Longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and his wife
done; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte's
gained her point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections were
agreeable; his society was irksome, and his attachment to her must be
imaginary. But still he would be her husband.--Without thinking highly
fortune, and however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their
obtained; and at the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been
handsome, she felt all the good luck of it. The least agreeable
person. Elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame her; and though
disapprobation. She resolved to give her the information herself, and
ingenuity to evade, and he was at the same time exercising great
for the night; and Mrs. Bennet with great politeness and cordiality said
gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and you
They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish for
for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so
displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us
and be satisfied that _we_ shall take no offence."
affectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily receive
now take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting
to understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of
her younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him.
solidity in his reflections which often struck her, and though by no
means so clever as herself, she thought that if encouraged to read and
kind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a
possibility as that she could encourage him herself, and her
bounds of decorum, and she could not help crying out,
The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her
regained her composure, and calmly replied,
But Elizabeth had now recollected herself, and making a strong effort
of their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished
never was. I ask only a comfortable home; and considering Mr. Collins's
character, connections, and situation in life, I am convinced that my
Elizabeth quietly answered "Undoubtedly;"--and after an awkward pause,
longer, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard. It
herself and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction
Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what
she had heard, and doubting whether she were authorised to mention it,
and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the
politeness, protested he must be entirely mistaken, and Lydia, always
unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed,
him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the
mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and
endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters,
was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the
of Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.
together; and fourthly, that the match might be broken off. Two
Elizabeth was the real cause of all the mischief; and the other, that
she herself had been barbarously used by them all; and on these two
console and nothing appease her.--Nor did that day wear out her
or Lady Lucas without being rude, and many months were gone before she
Mr. Bennet's emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such
been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and
nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kitty and
clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news
Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she
though Mrs. Bennet's sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been
Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them
mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that no
sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could
never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious, as
Bingley had now been gone a week, and nothing was heard of his return.
Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting
father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a
of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it was
complain of it as her husband.--It was very strange that he should come
and exceedingly troublesome.--She hated having visitors in the house
while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the
most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and they
Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous
was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane's happiness, and so
and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss
Darcy and the amusements of London, might be too much, she feared, for
concealing, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject
and luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them
him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time
thing concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill humour, and
them she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and
they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself
and her daughters out of the house, as soon as Mr. Bennet were dead. She
complained bitterly of all this to her husband.
make way for _her_, and live to see her take my place in it!"
This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and, therefore, instead of
one's own daughters I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr.
By the Author of "Sense and Sensibility."
Miss Bingley's letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very first
the winter, and concluded with her brother's regret at not having had
Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of
the chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on, and Caroline
boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict
inmate of Mr. Darcy's house, and mentioned with raptures, some plans of
for her sister, and resentment against all the others. To Caroline's
had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she
of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice his own happiness to
which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. She
could think of nothing else, and yet whether Bingley's regard had really
longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could
"Oh! that my dear mother had more command over herself; she can have no
will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shall
and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not _that_ pain. A
that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it
and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say to
Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back
world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of any body. _I_ only
want to think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do not be
whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see
of the world, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms
my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the
situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins's respectability, and
large family; that as to fortune, it is a most eligible match; and be
like regard and esteem for our cousin."
understanding, than I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is
as I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who marries
individual, change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor
endeavour to persuade yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and
Jane, "and I hope you will be convinced of it, by seeing them happy
mentioned _two_ instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I intreat
you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that person_ to blame, and
to be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing but
unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness,
want of attention to other people's feelings, and want of resolution,
only wish his happiness, and if he is attached to me, no other woman can
happiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they
connections, and pride."
affection, you make every body acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most
Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley's
Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no
more, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account
the effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw
being married, a girl likes to be crossed in love a little now and then.
It is something to think of, and gives her a sort of distinction among
be _your_ man. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably."
family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now
heard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him,
was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and every body was
Hertfordshire; her mild and steady candour always pleaded for
allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes--but by everybody else
After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity, Mr.
his fair cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father
brother and his wife, who came as usual to spend the Christmas at
trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been so well
bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger than
Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Philips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant
woman, and a great favourite with all her Longbourn nieces. Between the
two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a very particular
distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was
Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. They
girls had been on the point of marriage, and after all there was nothing
and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have
a daughter married before I have, and that Longbourn estate is just as
them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted
so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us, of
the course of Jane and Elizabeth's correspondence with her, made her
sister a slight answer, and in compassion to her nieces turned the
for a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgets
inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time
they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he
offended two or three young ladies, by not asking them to dance, and I
service--and perhaps a little relief from home, may be as useful as
Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded
town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go
friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a
impurities, were he once to enter it; and depend upon it, Mr. Bingley
hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that
his affection might be re-animated, and the influence of his friends
Miss Bennet accepted her aunt's invitation with pleasure; and the
The Gardiners staid a week at Longbourn; and what with the Philipses,
the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its
of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family
made part of it, of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and
of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and she
Hertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such
acquaintance in common; and, though Wickham had been little there since
Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by
minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her
delighting both him and herself. On being made acquainted with the
with it, and was confident at last, that she recollected having heard
Mrs. Gardiner's caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on
are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking
_him_; he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune he
must not let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all
expect you to use it. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution and
"Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise."
myself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me, if I
the most agreeable man I ever saw--and if he becomes really attached to
me the greatest honour; and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My
necessity of constant company for her friends. But really, and upon my
honour, I will try to do what I think to be wisest; and now, I hope you
Her aunt assured her that she was; and Elizabeth having thanked her for
by the Gardiners and Jane; but as he took up his abode with the Lucases,
now fast approaching, and she was at length so far resigned as to think
it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say in an ill-natured tone that
and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she rose
to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother's ungracious and
reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied her
"And I have another favour to ask. Will you come and see me?"
"My father and Maria are to come to me in March," added Charlotte, "and
The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from
the church door, and every body had as much to say or to hear on the
subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and their
correspondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been; that it
and, though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the
like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to
wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing
which she could not praise. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, and
roads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine's behaviour was most
friendly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins's picture of Hunsford and
Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait
safe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it
town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor-street."
She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley.
glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming
not long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shall
Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to
for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the
visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more,
     and not a note, not a line, did I receive in the mean time. When
     not a word of wishing to see me again, and was in every respect so
     acting wrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her
     brother is the cause of it. I need not explain myself farther; and
     feels it, it will easily account for her behaviour to me; and so
     feel on his behalf, is natural and amiable. I cannot but wonder,
     being in town, I am certain, from something she said herself; and
     understand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I should
     thought, and think only of what will make me happy, your affection,
     and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear
     Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with Sir William and Maria. I am
review of it; and as a punishment for him, as well as a possible
concerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabeth had
see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain.
Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied
permitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most
Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and while able to
ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very
All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relating the
pure and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name,
and wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordial
watchfulness has been effectual; and though I should certainly be a more
Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly. Kitty and Lydia take
of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that
handsome young men must have something to live on, as well as the
With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise
diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and
sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to take
and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure
Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins. There was
novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such
a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have
and was finally settled according to Charlotte's first sketch. She was
to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement of
spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became
and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he
told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter.
The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on
Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the
first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner
she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their
to him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced,
amiable and pleasing.
him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a good
could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much delight
wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were worn
It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early
they entered the passage she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth,
looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and
lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls,
wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her
for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and
kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and
shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.
sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to
particulars also of Miss Bingley's visit in Gracechurch-street, and
repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and
Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham's desertion, and
between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end,
and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me,
because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a
girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is
"But he paid her not the smallest attention, till her grandfather's
making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equally
mercenary, and _she_ shall be foolish."
Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not
unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in
No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her
acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. "My dear, dear
fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What are men
to rocks and mountains? Oh! what hours of transport we shall spend! And
and rivers, shall not be jumbled together in our imaginations; nor, when
Every object in the next day's journey was new and interesting to
Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state for enjoyment; for she had
and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.
search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.
the house standing in it, the green pales and the laurel hedge, every
thing declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotte appeared at
the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate, which led by a
short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of the whole
pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with coming, when
was just what it had been, and he detained her some minutes at the gate
to hear and satisfy his enquiries after all her family. They were then,
taken into the house; and as soon as they were in the parlour, he
abode, and punctually repeated all his wife's offers of refreshment.
Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help
and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her, as if
every thing seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to gratify him
by any sigh of repentance; and rather looked with wonder at her friend
give an account of their journey and of all that had happened in London,
and well laid out, and to the cultivation of which he attended himself.
To work in his garden was one of his most respectable pleasures; and
Elizabeth admired the command of countenance with which Charlotte talked
of the healthfulness of the exercise, and owned she encouraged it as
much as possible. Here, leading the way through every walk and cross
walk, and scarcely allowing them an interval to utter the praises he
and could tell how many trees there were in the most distant clump. But
opposite the front of his house. It was a handsome modern building, well
frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte
took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased,
probably, to have the opportunity of shewing it without her husband's
help. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and every
thing was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of
forgotten, there was really a great air of comfort throughout, and by
de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will
be delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and I
include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which she
charming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to
Charlotte, "and a most attentive neighbour."
The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news, and
telling again what had been already written; and when it closed,
Charlotte's degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding,
and composure in bearing with her husband, and to acknowledge that it
interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with
confusion; and after listening a moment, she heard somebody running up
stairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She opened the
door, and met Maria in the landing place, who, breathless with
"Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for
haste, and come down this moment."
and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the lane, in quest
were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her
creature. Who would have thought she could be so thin and small!"
looks sickly and cross.--Yes, she will do for him very well. She will
Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in
conversation with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth's high
greatness before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss De Bourgh
At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and
The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering
visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his
wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity of
her Ladyship's asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at
servants, and so splendid a dinner might not wholly overpower them.
becomes herself and daughter. I would advise you merely to put on
her Ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas,
who had been little used to company, and she looked forward to her
across the park.--Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and
raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but
house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally
moment increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly
miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money and rank, she
rapturous air, the fine proportion and finished ornaments, they followed
her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting.--Her Ladyship, with great
condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had settled it
with her husband that the office of introduction should be her's, it was
performed in a proper manner, without any of those apologies and thanks
awed, by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage
enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word;
and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge
quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her
strongly-marked features, which might once have been handsome. Her air
authoritative a tone, as marked her self-importance, and brought Mr.
Wickham immediately to Elizabeth's mind; and from the observation of the
When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment
being so thin, and so small. There was neither in figure nor face, any
likeness between the ladies. Miss De Bourgh was pale and sickly; her
features, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very
there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening
to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before
beauties, and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much
The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants,
and all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he
her ladyship's desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish
nothing greater.--He carved, and ate, and praised with delighted
alacrity; and every dish was commended, first by him, and then by Sir
But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and
between Charlotte and Miss De Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged in
listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all
Miss De Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish, and fearing she
were indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the
gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.
concerns familiarly and minutely, and gave her a great deal of advice,
regulated in so small a family as her's, and instructed her as to the
care of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was
Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and
the least, and who she observed to Mrs. Collins, was a very genteel,
them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they
had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been her
necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh's family.--Do you play and sing, Miss
some day.--Do your sisters play and sing?"
Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as
read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to be
"Aye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will prevent, and if I had
and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It is
of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and
was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite
younger sisters, that they should not have their share of society and
and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever
"I am not one and twenty."
When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card tables
were placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat
down to quadrille; and as Miss De Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the
for every fish he won, and apologising if he thought he won too many.
and noble names.
When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose,
gratefully accepted, and immediately ordered. The party then gathered
arrival of the coach, and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr.
Collins's side, and as many bows on Sir William's, they departed. As
satisfy Mr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her Ladyship's
praise into his own hands.
to convince him of his daughter's being most comfortably settled, and of
her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not often met
to driving him out in his gig, and shewing him the country; but when he
went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments, and
by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfast and
and writing, and looking out of window in his own book room, which
the dining-parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a
much less in his own apartment, had they sat in one equally lively; and
From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and
along, and how often especially Miss De Bourgh drove by in her phaeton,
almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had
Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and
and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings
to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many
hours. Now and then, they were honoured with a call from her Ladyship,
and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during
and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement
of the furniture, or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she
Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be
village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold
them into harmony and plenty.
and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one card
however was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time
Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year, that she
had often great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where
a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and
Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it, was to bring an
was expected there in the course of a few weeks, and though there were
furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and
satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and
Miss Lucas and herself.
in order to have the earliest assurance of it; and after making his bow
his uncle, Lord ---- and to the great surprise of all the party, when
them from her husband's room, crossing the road, and immediately running
before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly
who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and
reserve, to Mrs. Collins; and whatever might be his feelings towards her
readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but
his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and
way, and after a moment's pause, added,
Bingleys and Jane; and she thought he looked a little confused as he
subject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went
and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasure of
house, they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,
such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to
The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they joined
acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact,
welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins's pretty friend had
moreover caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and
talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying
at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so
well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much
spirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as
well as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned
towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship after a
There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoyment
Catherine; "and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel,
"So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write
she will never play really well, unless she practises more; and though
told her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the piano-forte in
Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt's ill breeding, and made
promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. He
drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then
her, and moving with his usual deliberation towards the piano-forte,
stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer's
countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first
convenient pause, turned to him with an arch smile, and said,
not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I
Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to
me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky
all that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me
and such things may come out, as will shock your relations to hear."
was at a ball--and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced
four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge,
"True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball room. Well, Colonel
addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. "Shall we ask him why a man of sense and
education, and who has lived in the world, is ill qualified to recommend
force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I
Darcy smiled and said, "You are perfectly right. You have employed your
Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said
"Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss, if she practised more, and
discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss
with them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received
them with all the forbearance of civility; and at the request of the
Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane,
while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village,
Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away her
when the door opened, and to her very great surprise, Mr. Darcy, and Mr.
He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologised for his
They then sat down, and when her enquiries after Rosings were made,
necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence
recollecting _when_ she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and feeling
before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London."
She found that she was to receive no other answer--and, after a short
very little of his time there in future. He has many friends, and he is
at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually
for his own, and we must expect him to keep or quit it on the same
friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the
He took the hint, and soon began with, "This seems a very comfortable
"I believe she did--and I am sure she could not have bestowed her
him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding--though
thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however, and in a
distance of her own family and friends."
understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and
Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered,
family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many
case _here_. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not
such a one as will allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded my
Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, "_You_ cannot
feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and,
calm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte
and her sister, just returned from their walk. The tte--tte surprised
on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying
even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the case; and after various
was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard table, but gentlemen cannot be
always within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the
separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their
him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in
former favourite George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw
to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there
ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it
her; and as she would have liked to believe this change the effect of
love, and the object of that love, her friend Eliza, she sat herself
Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. He
doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it
being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.
certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but,
in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.
should bring him where no one else was brought; and to prevent its ever
very odd!--Yet it did, and even a third. It seemed like wilful
merely a few formal enquiries and an awkward pause and then away, but he
actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. He never
being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her opinion of Mr.
and Mrs. Collins's happiness; and that in speaking of Rosings and her
not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to expect that whenever
might arise in that quarter. It distressed her a little, and she was
letter, and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not
away the letter immediately and forcing a smile, she said,
do every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage. Are
And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonage
many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speak
feelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial and
either. Now, seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and
"These are home questions--and perhaps I cannot say that I have
"Our habits of expence make us too dependant, and there are not many in
"Is this," thought Elizabeth, "meant for me?" and she coloured at the
very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds."
He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To interrupt
for the present, and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he
little difficult to manage, and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she
As she spoke, she observed him looking at her earnestly, and the manner
"You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I dare
very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and
Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him."
particulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing him
the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from
Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with
determine and direct in what manner that friend was to be happy." "But,"
Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer; and,
taken to separate Mr. Bingley and Jane, she had never doubted; but she
had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and
_he_ was the cause, his pride and caprice were the cause of all that
Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a
in the world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have
Fitzwilliam's words, and these strong objections probably were, her
having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in
objection. All loveliness and goodness as she is! Her understanding
excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neither could
and respectability which he will probably never reach." When she thought
of sense; and she was quite decided at last, that he had been partly
governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of
The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on a
headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening that, added to
seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go, and as much
as possible prevented her husband from pressing her, but Mr. Collins
But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that
cheerfulness which had been used to characterize her style, and which,
proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself, and kindly
and a still greater, that in less than a fortnight she should herself be
with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her
that he had no intentions at all, and agreeable as he was, she did not
door bell, and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its
the evening, and might now come to enquire particularly after her. But
this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently
She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and
agitated manner, and thus began,
repressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love
doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement,
and the avowal of all that he felt and had long felt for her,
those of the heart to be detailed, and he was not more eloquent on the
the compliment of such a man's affection, and though her intentions did
all his endeavours, he had found impossible to conquer; and with
his hand. As he said this, she could easily see that he had no doubt of
a favourable answer. He _spoke_ of apprehension and anxiety, but his
exasperate farther, and when he ceased, the colour rose into her
cheeks, and she said,
felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now thank you. But I
cannot--I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly
one. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be of
surprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of
appearance of composure, and would not open his lips, till he believed
offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me
against your will, against your reason, and even against your character?
was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she
excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. You dare not,
world for caprice and instability, the other to its derision for
disappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutest
She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening
a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.
which was no less his due than his desert. You have done all this! and
yet you can treat the mention of his misfortunes with contempt and
walk, and turning towards her, "these offences might have been
concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief of my being
Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and just.
She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she continued,
"You could not have made me the offer of your hand in any possible way
Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an
expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on.
belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the
dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the
feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been.
Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best
wishes for your health and happiness."
And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him
the next moment open the front door and quit the house.
support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried for half an
sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his own case,
and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Mr. Wickham, his
Charlotte's observation, and hurried her away to her room.
Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations
else, and totally indisposed for employment, she resolved soon after
breakfast to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding
sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park,
The park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed
tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and
made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the
edged the park; he was moving that way; and fearful of its being Mr.
near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced
gate. He had by that time reached it also, and holding out a letter,
slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of
Elizabeth opened the letter, and to her still increasing wonder,
quite through, in a very close hand.--The envelope itself was likewise
from Rosings, at eight o'clock in the morning, and was as follows:--
     cannot be too soon forgotten; and the effort which the formation,
     and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been
     spared, had not my character required it to be written and read.
     You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand your
     demand it of your justice.
     "Two offences of a very different nature, and by no means of equal
     Mr. Bingley from your sister,--and the other, that I had, in
     defiance of various claims, in defiance of honour and humanity,
     ruined the immediate prosperity, and blasted the prospects of Mr.
     Wickham.--Wilfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of
     had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage, and who
     future secured, when the following account of my actions and their
     necessity must be obeyed--and farther apology would be absurd.--I
     observed my friend's behaviour attentively; and I could then
     ever witnessed in him. Your sister I also watched.--Her look and
     manners were open, cheerful and engaging as ever, but without any
     symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained convinced from the
     of your sister's countenance and air was such, as might have given
     venture to say that my investigations and decisions are not usually
     repugnance;--causes which, though still existing, and existing to
     by herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by
     your concern for the defects of your nearest relations, and your
     bestowed on you and your eldest sister, than it is honourable to
     the sense and disposition of both.--I will only say farther, that
     confirmed, and every inducement heightened, which could have led me
     coincidence of feeling was soon discovered; and, alike sensible
     went--and there I readily engaged in the office of pointing out to
     my friend, the certain evils of such a choice.--I described, and
     and it was done for the best.--On this subject I have nothing more
     feelings, it was unknowingly done; and though the motives which
     Pemberley estates; and whose good conduct in the discharge of his
     trust, naturally inclined my father to be of service to him, and on
     liberally bestowed. My father supported him at school, and
     engaging; he had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the
     of nearly the same age with himself, and who had opportunities of
     died about five years ago; and his attachment to Mr. Wickham was to
     profession might allow, and if he took orders, desired that a
     vacant. There was also a legacy of one thousand pounds. His own
     father did not long survive mine, and within half a year from these
     and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would
     ever be in a situation to receive it, and accepted in return three
     thousand pounds. All connection between us seemed now dissolved. I
     studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now free from all
     restraint, his life was a life of idleness and dissipation. For
     assured me, and I had no difficulty in believing it, were
     and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained, if I would
     person to provide for, and I could not have forgotten my revered
     circumstances--and he was doubtless as violent in his abuse of me
     myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce
     Fitzwilliam, and myself. About a year ago, she was taken from
     school, and an establishment formed for her in London; and last
     and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there
     proved to have been a prior acquaintance between him and Mrs.
     Younge, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and by
     her connivance and aid, he so far recommended himself to Georgiana,
     herself in love, and to consent to an elopement. She was then but
     fifteen, which must be her excuse; and after stating her
     intended elopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea
     of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as
     and how I acted. Regard for my sister's credit and feelings
     the place immediately, and Mrs. Younge was of course removed from
     sister's fortune, which is thirty thousand pounds; but I cannot
     have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject
     concerning either, detection could not be in your power, and
     near relationship and constant intimacy, and still more as one of
     by the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may
     some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course
she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited.
she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power;
and steadfastly was she persuaded that he could have no explanation to
hardly left her power of comprehension, and from impatience of knowing
insensibility, she instantly resolved to be false, and his account of
was all pride and insolence.
if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which
were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition.
Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished
This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!"--and when she had
was unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as she could, she
again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and
commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence.
what he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy,
was fresh in her memory, and as she recalled his very words, it was
other; and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did
not err. But when she read, and re-read with the closest attention, the
thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down the
The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay to
felt a wish of enquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner, had
had described as the idleness and vice of many years continuance. But no
her, in every charm of air and address; but she could remember no more
substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and
Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she was
near concern in all his cousin's affairs, and whose character she had no
him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and
between Wickham and herself, in their first evening at Mr. Philips's.
struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and
himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions
_he_ should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball
His attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and
hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer
and fainter; and in farther justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not
asserted his blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive as
together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways, seen any thing
esteemed and valued--that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a
brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of
every thing right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and
that friendship between a person capable of it, and such an amiable man
often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified my
folly.--Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect
prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either were
_there_, had appeared very insufficient; and she read it again. Widely
unsuspicious of her sister's attachment;--and she could not help
feelings, though fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a
constant complacency in her air and manner, not often united with great
for denial, and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded, as
having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first
The compliment to herself and her sister, was not unfelt. It soothed,
self-attracted by the rest of her family;--and as she considered that
relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt
After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every
and reconciling herself as well as she could, to a change so sudden and
so important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her
at length return home; and she entered the house with the wish of
appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such
an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her
The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning; and Mr. Collins having
good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the
hastened to console Lady Catherine, and her daughter; and on his return,
attached to these young men; and know them to be so much attached to
Mr. Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here, which
were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.
spirits, and immediately accounting for it herself, by supposing that
far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and as
for one of you--and indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I
speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea of two young women travelling
thing.--Young women should always be properly guarded and attended,
with her.--Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr. Darcy, of Pemberley, and Lady
and as she did not answer them all herself, attention was necessary,
as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a solitary walk,
studied every sentence: and her feelings towards its writer were at
she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against
herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion.
behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret; and in
youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right
and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother's indulgence,
irritable, and completely under Lydia's guidance, had been always
affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would
scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While
there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while
Anxiety on Jane's behalf, was another prevailing concern, and Mr.
proved to have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame,
happiness, Jane had been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own
there; and her Ladyship again enquired minutely into the particulars of
and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right
work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.
a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year;
and Miss De Bourgh exerted herself so far as to curtsey and hold out her
hand to both.
On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few
minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of
manner of living, our small rooms, and few domestics, and the little we
and that we have done every thing in our power to prevent your spending
Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She had
spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with
Charlotte, and the kind attentions she had received, must make _her_
feel the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified; and with a more smiling
time not disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most
society, and from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of
extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast. You see on
Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was
and truth in a few short sentences.
have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear
marriage. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of
character and ideas between us. We seem to have been designed for each
the case, and with equal sincerity could add that she firmly believed
and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was not sorry, however, to
such society!--But she had chosen it with her eyes open; and though
ask for compassion. Her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her
poultry, and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their
placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After an affectionate
Mr. Collins, and as they walked down the garden, he was commissioning
for the kindness he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and his
compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed her
in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed, when
Elizabeth made no objection;--the door was then allowed to be shut, and
a day or two since we first came!--and yet how many things have
Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and
Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her
had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at
Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own
and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried into
and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet's carriage was
punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room up
guard, and dressing a sallad and cucumber.
pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any
unconcern, "Oh! but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and
one wears this summer, after the ----shire have left Meryton, and they
"They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to
and I dare say would hardly cost any thing at all. Mamma would like to
and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton, and a whole
regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton."
table. "What do you think? It is excellent news, capital news, and about
Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told that he
need not stay. Lydia laughed, and said,
"Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the
was little other than her own breast had formerly harboured and fancied
As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was
ordered; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their
boxes, workbags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty's and
bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another bandbox! Well, now
let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way
flirting? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband
She is almost three and twenty! Lord, how ashamed I should be of not
being married before three and twenty! My aunt Philips wants you so to
get husbands, you can't think. She says Lizzy had better have taken Mr.
how I should like to be married before any of you; and then I would
of fun the other day at Colonel Forster's. Kitty and me were to spend
the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the
evening; (by the bye, Mrs. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and so
she asked the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen
was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We
lady,--only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Col. and Mrs.
Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow
one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny,
and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they
did not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs.
something, and then they soon found out what was the matter."
With such kind of histories of their parties and good jokes, did Lydia,
assisted by Kitty's hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her
in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet
came to meet Maria and hear the news: and various were the subjects
after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet was
doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present
fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and on the other,
retailing them all to the younger Miss Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice
as we went along, Kitty and me drew up all the blinds, and pretended
there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if
Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we
behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest
cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have
And then we were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so
body for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.
Meryton and see how every body went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed
and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort to _her_,
a fortnight they were to go, and once gone, she hoped there could be
at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often
longer be overcome; and at length resolving to suppress every particular
in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be surprised,
Darcy and herself.
natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. She was
"His being so sure of succeeding, was wrong," said she; "and certainly
Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and
enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting
consider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and with the
knowledge of your ill opinion too! and having to relate such a thing of
"Oh! no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so
growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion
makes me saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will
countenance! such an openness and gentleness in his manner."
two young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other all the
at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty."
felt, no Jane to comfort me and say that I had not been so very weak and
vain and nonsensical as I knew I had! Oh! how I wanted you!"
ought, or ought not to make our acquaintance in general understand
Miss Bennet paused a little and then replied, "Surely there can be no
to his sister, was meant to be kept as much as possible to myself; and
will soon be gone; and therefore it will not signify to anybody here,
what he really is. Sometime hence it will be all found out, and then we
ever. He is now perhaps sorry for what he has done, and anxious to
and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she might wish
partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfect
understanding between the parties could justify her in throwing off this
love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment, and from
her age and disposition, greater steadiness than first attachments often
boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance, and prefer him to
every other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention to the
regrets, which must have been injurious to her own health and their
very undeserving young man--and I do not suppose there is the least
coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have enquired of every
shall always say that he used my daughter extremely ill; and if I was
Jane will die of a broken heart, and then he will be sorry for what he
"Well, Lizzy," continued her mother soon afterwards, "and so the
the last of the regiment's stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies in
and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very
frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and
Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such
she had herself endured on a similar occasion, five and twenty years
objections; and never had she before been so much disposed to pardon his
very young woman, and very lately married. A resemblance in good humour
and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of
the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely
congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever;
right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older."
In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make
exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she
for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her were it
such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more
be greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said,
place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so little
us all, which must arise from the public notice of Lydia's unguarded and
wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark
father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and
will be fixed, and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt
that ever made herself and her family ridiculous. A flirt too, in the
worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond
youth and a tolerable person; and from the ignorance and emptiness of
ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrouled! Oh! my dear father, can you
suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever
they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the
Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject; and
affectionately taking her hand, said in reply,
"Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known,
you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less
Brighton. Let her go then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will
keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an
continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was not
She was confident of having performed her duty, and to fret over
Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her
saw herself the object of attention, to tens and to scores of them at
and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and to complete the view, she
Had she known that her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and
melancholy conviction of her husband's never intending to go there
But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures
an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. In his present
finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous
gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the
reproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatever
and her preference secured at any time by their renewal.
with others of the officers at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth
mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam's and Mr. Darcy's having both spent three
weeks at Rosings, and asked him if he were acquainted with the former.
recollection and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen
him often; and after observing that he was a very gentleman-like man,
ordinary style? for I dare not hope," he continued in a lower and more
and anxious attention, while she added,
Wickham's alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated
embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of
is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion and
judgment he stands much in awe. His fear of her, has always operated, I
know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to his
the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge
Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a
between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the
only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Mrs.
and impressive in her injunctions that she would not miss the
was every reason to believe would be attended to; and in the clamorous
comfort. Her father captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance
of good humour, which youth and beauty generally give, had married a
woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind, had very early in
esteem, and confidence, had vanished for ever; and all his views of
the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal
her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This is not
father's behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but
respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of
herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to
and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own
abroad were less varied than before; and at home she had a mother and
them, threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty
folly and assurance, by a situation of such double danger as a watering
place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what has been
some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by
present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes
mother and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in
never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by
When Lydia went away, she promised to write very often and very minutely
to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and
they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers
had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as
violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going to the
camp;--and from her correspondence with her sister, there was still less
humour and cheerfulness began to re-appear at Longbourn. Everything wore
back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose. Mrs. Bennet
was restored to her usual querulous serenity, and by the middle of June
mention an officer above once a day, unless by some cruel and malicious
approaching; and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter
arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and
setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again
within a month; and as that left too short a period for them to go so
far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with
the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up
the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour; and, according to the
weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The
town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where
the Lakes; and still thought there might have been time enough. But it
was her business to be satisfied--and certainly her temper to be happy;
and all was soon right again.
impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its
and rob it of a few petrified spars without his perceiving me."
before her uncle and aunt's arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr. and
Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two
Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and
way--teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.
The Gardiners staid only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next
morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement. One
suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear
inconveniences--cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure--and affection
and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were
former residence, and where she had lately learned that some
all the principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of
willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.
Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She
occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea; and
such a risk. But against this, there were objections; and she finally
proprietor, and with no little alarm, whether the family were down for
the summer. A most welcome negative followed the last question--and her
curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the
next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and
By the Author of "Sense and Sensibility."
Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned
The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. They
entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through
Elizabeth's mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired
every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually ascended for
half a mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable
eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by
the road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome, stone
building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of high
woody hills;--and in front, a stream of some natural importance was
all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt, that
They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and,
hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to
fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her. They
room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went
good; and she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered
on its banks, and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace
be seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable
splendor, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.
viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and
welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt.--But no,"--recollecting
herself,--"that could never be: my uncle and aunt would have been lost
asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Mrs. Reynolds
Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached, and saw
The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was the picture of a
"is my master--and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the
looking at the picture; "it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell
Elizabeth coloured, and said--"A little."
"And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, Ma'am?"
"Yes, very handsome."
"I am sure _I_ know none so handsome; but in the gallery up stairs you
master's favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to
"And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?" said Mr. Gardiner.
"Oh! yes--the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so
accomplished!--She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is a
Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were easy and pleasant, encouraged her
communicativeness by his questions and remarks; Mrs. Reynolds, either
master and his sister.
time here; and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months."
Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying, "It is
"I say no more than the truth, and what every body will say that knows
and she listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added,
"I have never had a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him
and was grateful to her uncle for saying,
good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and he
"Yes, Ma'am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him--just
Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Mrs.
of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the
master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his
"He is the best landlord, and the best master," said she, "that ever
pretty sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and
lightness than the apartments below; and were informed that it was but
The picture gallery, and two or three of the principal bed-rooms, were
but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already
Darcy's, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and
arrested her--and she beheld a striking resemblance of Mr. Darcy, with
earnest contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the
of an intelligent servant? As a brother, a landlord, a master, she
forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character, and as she
stood before the canvas, on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes
gratitude than it had ever raised before; she remembered its warmth, and
they returned down stairs, and taking leave of the housekeeper, were
to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the former was
They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was his
instantly met, and the cheeks of each were overspread with the deepest
blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immoveable from
and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least
aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused,
scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she
uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the
spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his
enquiries as to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her stay
in Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the
At length, every idea seemed to fail him; and, after standing a few
moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took
The others then joined her, and expressed their admiration of his
figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and, wholly engrossed by her own
feelings, followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and
moment alighted from his horse or his carriage. She blushed again and
he put his letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, nor how to
They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and
before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered
mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and seemed
what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of every thing,
roused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.
They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while,
of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of
overspreading many, and occasionally part of the stream. Mr. Gardiner
miles round. It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed
the scene; it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and
stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered
the bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner,
who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only of
therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house
taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the
occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the man
about them, that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this
slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth's astonishment was
approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk being here less
interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with
that he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his
but she had not got beyond the words "delightful," and "charming," when
some unlucky recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of
changed, and she said no more.
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked
This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared; and
The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their
it; and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he
connexion was evident; he sustained it however with fortitude, and so
far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into
attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every
The conversation soon turned upon fishing, and she heard Mr. Darcy
time to supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of
extreme; and continually was she repeating, "Why is he so altered? From
Elizabeth's arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred
her husband's. Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on
place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been
you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and indeed, before we
the country." He acknowledged the truth of it all; and said that
will join me early to-morrow," he continued, "and among them are some
who will claim an acquaintance with you,--Mr. Bingley and his sisters."
between them; and if she might judge from his complexion, _his_ mind was
must be the work of her brother, and without looking farther, it was
was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and
the highest kind. They soon outstripped the others, and when they had
reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a
tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time, much might
have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but
she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dale with
great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly--and her patience
and her ideas were nearly worn out before the tte--tte was over. On
Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's coming up, they were all pressed to go into the
house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they parted
on each side with the utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed the ladies
into the carriage, and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him walking
The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them
"He is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming," said her uncle.
aunt, "but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now
than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such
"To be sure, Lizzy," said her aunt, "he is not so handsome as Wickham;
him better when they met in Kent than before, and that she had never
her uncle. "Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him
at his word about fishing, as he might change his mind another day, and
liberal master, I suppose, and _that_ in the eye of a servant
his behaviour to Wickham; and therefore gave them to understand, in as
construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor
Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned; but as they were now
the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out
to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs, to think of
acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an
much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing
but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy's civility, and above
her, the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was consequently
place with some of their new friends, and were just returned to the inn
carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and lady in a
livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of surprise
expected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment
of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many
her favour; and more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally
She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked
up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks
of enquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt, as made every thing worse.
Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction
Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though
little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearance
womanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her brother, but there
was sense and good humour in her face, and her manners were perfectly
unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as
acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Mr. Darcy had been, was much
also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her
satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley's quick step
was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All
and looked and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever
To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage
arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece, directed their observation towards
each with an earnest, though guarded, enquiry; and they soon drew from
feelings of each of her visitors, she wanted to compose her own, and to
make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she
was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be pleased.
In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and oh!
former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion that
soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere they
Jane, not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of saying more that
moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone which had
the pleasure of seeing her;" and, before she could reply, he added, "It
Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards
question, nor in the preceding remark, but there was a look and a manner
complaisance, and in all that he said, she heard an accent so far
she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance, and courting the good opinion
very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their last
great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardly
result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the
down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and
Their visitors staid with them above half an hour, and when they arose
their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner
any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of
her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.
again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many enquiries to
this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased; and on
little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of enquiries or hints from her
uncle and aunt, she staid with them only long enough to hear their
favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.
But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's curiosity; it was
Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far
not be untouched by his politeness, and had they drawn his character
from their own feelings, and his servant's report, without any reference
however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible,
years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be
had nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if
however, that he was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.
the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not
long enough to determine her feelings towards _one_ in that mansion; and
certainly did not hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she
time ceased to be repugnant to her feelings; and it was now heightened
favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light,
which yesterday had produced. But above all, above respect and esteem,
petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the
accidental meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without
of her friends, and bent on making her known to his sister. Such a
gratitude--for to love, ardent love, it must be attributed; and as such
welfare; and she only wanted to know how far she wished that welfare to
depend upon herself, and how far it would be for the happiness of both
It had been settled in the evening, between the aunt and niece, that
some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it
renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting
her appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know with
hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chesnuts
with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in
all that embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the
inferior, the belief of her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and
her niece, however, did her justice, and pitied her.
By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, they were noticed only by a curtsey; and
others; and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from
wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a
and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without
feared that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether
indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.
entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the
significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been
party; for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the
beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches, soon collected
feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but
gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river, and had left him
resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed;--a resolution the more
and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour
objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions
entrance, exerted herself much more to talk; and Elizabeth saw that he
was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded,
Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the
instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the
complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with
confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what
Darcy's opinion, and perhaps to remind the latter of all the follies and
possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley's connections her
hereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan, and without
Elizabeth's collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and
as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to
recollected her interest in the affair, and the very circumstance which
fixed them on her more, and more cheerfully.
Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer
above-mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their
Elizabeth's person, behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join
judgment could not err, and he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth, as
lovely and amiable. When Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley
She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeing that we
brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose wants
tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes, which
like at all; and in her air altogether, there is a self-sufficiency
wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the
success she expected. He was resolutely silent however; and, from a
were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect
seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at
considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance."
He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of
Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred, during
them both. The looks and behaviour of every body they had seen were
thought of him, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by
Jane, on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had
on the third, her repining was over, and her sister justified by the
They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and her
uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by
little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded;
but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident
     a most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming
     gone off to Scotland with one of his officers; to own the truth,
     match on both sides!--But I am willing to hope the best, and that
     his character has been misunderstood. Thoughtless and indiscreet I
     can easily believe him, but this step (and let us rejoice over it)
Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing
other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it
     write, but I have bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed.
     Imprudent as a marriage between Mr. Wickham and our poor Lydia
     there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone to Scotland.
     letter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were going to
     into a hackney-coach and dismissed the chaise that brought them
     Hertfordshire, anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes, and at
     the inns in Barnet and Hatfield, but without any success, no such
     came on to Longbourn, and broke his apprehensions to us in a manner
     most creditable to his heart. I am sincerely grieved for him and
     dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and mother believe the worst,
     pursue their first plan; and even if _he_ could form such a design
     marriage; he shook his head when I expressed my hopes, and said he
     and keeps her room. Could she exert herself it would be better, but
     this is not to be expected; and as to my father, I never in my life
     you all to come here, as soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and
     will not allow him to pursue any measure in the best and safest
     way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again
     to-morrow evening. In such an exigence my uncle's advice and
     comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness."
opened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared. Her pale face and impetuous
manner made him start, and before he could recover himself enough to
but let me, or let the servant, go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. You are
Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under her, and she felt how
accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and
On his quitting the room, she sat down, unable to support herself, and
or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration,
She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could
something indistinctly of his concern, and observe her in compassionate
"Oh yes!--They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were traced
Scotland."
"My father is gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle's
immediate assistance, and we shall be off, I hope, in half an hour. But
Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking up
and down the room in earnest meditation; his brow contracted, his air
gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her power
was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own
wishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved
every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief,
Elizabeth was soon lost to every thing else; and, after a pause of
reason to hope, and leaving his compliments for her relations, with only
marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a
contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those
feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would
If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth's
first interview with its object, and even before two words have been
and that its ill-success might perhaps authorise her to seek the other
with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia's infamy must
money; and how Lydia could ever have attached him, had appeared
as this, she might have sufficient charms; and though she did not
her virtue nor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy
fluctuating, but never without an object. The mischief of neglect and
family so deranged; a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and
requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing
importance, and till he entered the room, the misery of her impatience
was severe. Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing,
cause of their summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on
never been a favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be
deeply affected. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after
the first exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner readily
less, thanked him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated
"Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our engagement.
hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure
business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to
sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr.
remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of
have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn.
drove from the town; "and really, upon serious consideration, I am much
friendless, and who was actually staying in his colonel's family, that I
opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and
hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland, if that had been the
that they are not gone to Scotland."
not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it
expeditiously, married in London, than in Scotland."
beyond youth, health, and good humour, that could make him for her sake,
brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from my father's
behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has ever
do as little, and think as little about it, as any father could do, in
"It does seem, and it is most shocking indeed," replied Elizabeth, with
tears in her eyes, "that a sister's sense of decency and virtue in such
been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half year,
and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle
and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way.
flirtation, and officers, have been in her head. She has been doing
every thing in her power by thinking and talking on the subject, to give
person and address that can captivate a woman."
as false and deceitful, as he is insinuating."
of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you, yourself, when last at
with such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are other
must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found
and Jane seem so well to understand?"
"Oh, yes!--that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and saw
so much both of Mr. Darcy and his relation, Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was
side; and had any thing of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware
particular attention, and, consequently, after a moderate period of
extravagant and wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others
to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject, by
They travelled as expeditiously as possible; and sleeping one night on
The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing
on the steps of the house, as they entered the paddock; and when the
faces, and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of
capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.
Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them an hasty kiss,
that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which I
shaken. She is up stairs, and will have great satisfaction in seeing you
all. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty, thank
Her sister, however, assured her, of her being perfectly well; and their
conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were
the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and
thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.
had already asked, were of course repeated by the others, and they soon
deserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and that
to explain their proceedings, and perhaps announce the marriage.
tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villanous
conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and ill usage;
child! And now here's Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight
Wickham, wherever he meets him, and then he will be killed, and what is
in his grave; and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what
They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. Gardiner, after
general assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told
her that he meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist
may gain some news of them, and till we know that they are not married,
and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as
lost. As soon as I get to town, I shall go to my brother, and make him
come home with me to Gracechurch Street, and then we may consult
wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, _make_ them
out of my wits; and have such tremblings, such flutterings, all over me,
such spasms in my side, and pains in my head, and such beatings at
her hopes as her fears; and, after talking with her in this manner till
Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real
tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it
better that _one_ only of the household, and the one whom they could
most trust, should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the
In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been
appearance before. One came from her books, and the other from her
toilette. The faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change
"This is a most unfortunate affair; and will probably be much talked of.
But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of
brittle than it is beautiful,--and that she cannot be too much guarded
hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of the
of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss
the subject, by saying, "But tell me all and every thing about it, which
grieved for him. His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He
any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension
their plan, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not
repeat his persuasion of their not marrying--and from _that_, I am
right. My father and mother knew nothing of that, they only felt how
did. He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant. And since this sad
Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. These
     "You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help
     missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with
     world I love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy without
     surprise the greater, when I write to them, and sign my name Lydia
     engagement, and dancing with him to-night. Tell him I hope he will
     excuse me when he knows all, and tell him I will dance with him at
minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in
very difficult. My mother was in hysterics, and though I endeavoured to
well. Oh! that I had been with you, you have had every care and anxiety
"Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every
Kitty is slight and delicate, and Mary studies so much, that her hours
on Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till
Thursday with me. She was of great use and comfort to us all, and lady
condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters, if
insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied."
they last changed horses, see the postilions, and try if any thing could
with a fare from London; and as he thought the circumstance of a
gentleman and lady's removing from one carriage into another, might be
determined to make enquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible
to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any
and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding
His family knew him to be on all common occasions, a most negligent and
information of what was going on, and their uncle promised, at parting,
security for her husband's not being killed in a duel.
Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few
her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a
visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of
cheering and heartening them up, though as she never came without
to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with
and every body began to find out, that they had always distrusted the
her sister's ruin still more certain; and even Jane, who believed still
come, when if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before
found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch street.
That Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before his arrival, but
without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now
Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present, to leave London, and
Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference for
She had never heard of his having had any relations, except a father and
information; and, though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the
the first grand object of every morning's impatience. Through letters,
whatever of good or bad was to be told, would be communicated, and every
she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his
letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as
     "I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation
     from Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear Sir, that Mrs. Collins and
     myself sincerely sympathise with you, and all your respectable
     yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think that her own
     by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by lady Catherine and her daughter,
     all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me advise you then, my dear Sir,
     child from your affection for ever, and leave her to reap the
Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send.
up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one living.
amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would
his brother-in-law's intreaty that he would return to his family, and
"What, is he coming home, and without poor Lydia!" she cried. "Sure he
and make him marry her, if he comes away?"
and her children should go to London, at the same time that Mr. Bennet
journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn.
Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her
and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of
away, and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of
Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly
and I ought to feel it."
"She is happy, then," said her father, drily; "and her residence there
my library, in my night cap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble
for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at last learnt to be cautious, and
prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters. And you are
Two days after Mr. Bennet's return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking
coming towards them, and, concluding that she came to call them to their
this half hour, and master has had a letter."
library;--their father was in neither; and they were on the point of
and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately
came up with him, and eagerly cried out,
"Well, and what news does it bring? good or bad?"
Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up.
     "At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such
     equal share of the five thousand pounds, secured among your
     children after the decease of yourself and my sister; and,
     be. The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to
     to town again; therefore, stay quietly at Longbourn, and depend on
     my diligence and care. Send back your answer as soon as you can,
     and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it best, that my
"Oh! my dear father," she cried, "come back, and write immediately.
And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.
your uncle has laid down, to bring it about; and the other, how I am
temptation as one hundred a-year during my life, and fifty after I am
before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain! Oh!
farthing less than ten thousand pounds. I should be sorry to think so
"Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be
Mr. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought, continued
library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room.
and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice! Oh, Lydia!"
thousand pounds, or any thing like it, has been advanced. He has
children of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten
thousand pounds?"
Elizabeth, "and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall
not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be
requited. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal
protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage, as
Jane: "I hope and trust they will yet be happy. His consenting to marry
thinking. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself
they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in
therefore, and asked their father, whether he would not wish them to
make it known to her. He was writing, and, without raising his head,
"Take whatever you like, and get away."
Elizabeth took the letter from his writing table, and they went up
stairs together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet: one
being soon married, her joy burst forth, and every following sentence
delight, as she had ever been fidgetty from alarm and vexation. To know
every thing. How I long to see her! and to see dear Wickham too! But the
them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him how
her own uncle? If he had not had a family of his own, I and my children
must have had all his money you know, and it is the first time we have
such a flutter, that I am sure I can't write; so I will dictate, and you
She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and
cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had
would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy, to be quite
"I will go to Meryton," said she, "as soon as I am dressed, and tell the
Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage. An
heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you shall
congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took
worse, she had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and though, in
the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived
her husband, might then have rested in its proper place.
one, should be forwarded at the sole expence of his brother-in-law, and
assistance, and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.
in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow
and younger children would by that means be provided for. Five daughters
successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs.
late to be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy, and her
husband's love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their
Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet and
regard to Lydia at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet
approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the
hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket
allowance, and the continual presents in money, which passed to her,
through her mother's hands, Lydia's expences had been very little within
The good news quickly spread through the house; and with proportionate
house. But there was much to be talked of, in marrying her; and the
in this change of circumstances, because with such an husband, her
happy day, she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in
accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those
attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and
proper situation for her daughter, and, without knowing or considering
what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and
too far off! I could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for
Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption, while the
Bennet, before you take any, or all of these houses, for your son and
daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into _one_ house in this
soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with amazement and horror,
that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for his
shame at her eloping and living with Wickham, a fortnight before they
objection would now be added, an alliance and relationship of the
have been gladly and gratefully received! He was as generous, she
disposition and talents, would most suit her. His understanding and
and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved,
and from his judgment, information, and knowledge of the world, she must
connubial felicity really was. An union of a different tendency, and
How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence,
promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with intreaties
     on his account and my niece's. It is Mr. Wickham's intention to go
     into the regulars; and, among his former friends, there are still
     some who are able and willing to assist him in the army. He has the
     the kingdom. He promises fairly, and I hope among different people,
     our present arrangements, and to request that he will satisfy the
     various creditors of Mr. Wickham in and near Brighton, with
     at least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions, and
     unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from
     before she leaves the South. She is well, and begs to be dutifully
     remembered to you and her mother.--Your's, &c.
Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham's removal
North, just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her
Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and besides, it was such a
with every body, and had so many favourites.
received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who
agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister's feelings and
urged him so earnestly, yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her
and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was
prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. And their
sent his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that as soon
and, had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him
Their sister's wedding day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for her
them at ----, and they were to return in it, by dinner-time. Their
arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets; and Jane more especially,
the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed,
Lydia's voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and
she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and
welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand with an affectionate smile to
Wickham, who followed his lady, and wished them both joy, with an
so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely
enough to provoke him. Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was
shocked. Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and
fearless. She turned from sister to sister, demanding their
congratulations, and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly
round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and
were always so pleasing, that had his character and his marriage been
exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he
of an impudent man. _She_ blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of
There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could neither
of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near
world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led
it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have been things
not; and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle, so I was
determined he should know it, and so I let down the side glass next to
him, and took off my glove, and let my hand just rest upon the window
frame, so that he might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like
Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up, and ran out of the room;
and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to
anxious parade, walk up to her mother's right hand, and hear her say to
her eldest sister, "Ah! Jane, I take your place now, and you must go
from which she had been so wholly free at first. Her ease and good
spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Philips, the Lucases, and all
their other neighbours, and to hear herself called "Mrs. Wickham," by
each of them; and in the mean time, she went after dinner to shew her
ring and boast of being married, to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids.
room, "and what do you think of my husband? Is not he a charming man? I
husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go."
"Very true; and if I had my will, we should. But my dear Lydia, I don't
things. You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We
shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some
balls, and I will take care to get good partners for them all."
behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before the
particularly like your way of getting husbands."
had received his commission before he left London, and he was to join
No one but Mrs. Bennet, regretted that their stay would be so short; and
she made the most of the time, by visiting about with her daughter, and
than by his; and she would have wondered why, without violently caring
that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and
thing best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more birds on
not by, when I told mamma, and the others, all about it. Are not you
o'clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others
were to meet us at the church. Well, Monday morning came, and I was in
it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted. And there was my
aunt, all the time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as if
"Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would never
be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand, that my uncle and aunt
rather thin, but however the little Theatre was open. Well, and so just
know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away; and if we were beyond
again in ten minutes time, and then we all set out. However, I
all, and then Wickham would be angry."
sister's wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people,
where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go.
Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her
could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper,
know how a person unconnected with any of us, and (comparatively
a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it--unless it is,
think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with
letter; "and my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable
manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it
interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches, and prepared to be
     "I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole
     side. If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my
     impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am--and nothing
     him to act as he has done. But if you are really innocent and
     Darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours. It was all
     he had found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham were, and that
     he had seen and talked with them both, Wickham repeatedly, Lydia
     after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting
     mistaken pride, and confessed that he had before thought it beneath
     forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil, which had been brought on
     more than _we_ had; and the consciousness of this, was another
     Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was
     and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings. This Mrs.
     Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham; and he
     and corruption, for she really did know where her friend was to be
     London, and had she been able to receive them into her house, they
     street. He saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia.
     her to quit her present disgraceful situation, and return to her
     other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were her
     feelings, it only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a
     which were very pressing; and scrupled not to lay all the
     meant to resign his commission immediately; and as to his future
     somewhere, but he did not know where, and he knew he should have
     he would have been able to do something for him, and his situation
     to make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in
     could not be seen, and Mr. Darcy found, on further enquiry, that
     so properly consult as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed
     leave his name, and till the next day, it was only known that a
     father was gone, your uncle at home, and, as I said before, they
     had a great deal of talk together. They met again on Sunday, and
     to be done that he did not do himself; though I am sure (and I do
     to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to his niece,
     which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your
     explanation that would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give
     amounting, I believe, to considerably more than a thousand pounds,
     another thousand in addition to her own settled upon _her_, and his
     reserve, and want of proper consideration, that Wickham's character
     had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he had been
     received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth in
     when the wedding took place, and all money matters were then to
     us; and Wickham had constant admission to the house. _He_ was
     piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you, can give you no
     representing to her all the wickedness of what she had done, and
     and Jane, and for their sakes had patience with her. Mr. Darcy was
     punctual in his return, and as Lydia informed you, attended the
     wedding. He dined with us the next day, and was to leave town again
     His understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but
     a little more liveliness, and _that_, if he marry _prudently_, his
greatest share. The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had
great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the
trouble and mortification attendant on such a research; in which
supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and
despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently meet, reason with,
persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom he always most wished to
avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to pronounce. He had
shortly checked by other considerations, and she soon felt that even her
he had been wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising
it; and though she would not place herself as his principal inducement,
Proud that in a cause of compassion and honour, he had been able to get
again and again. It was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even
steadfastly both she and her uncle had been persuaded that affection and
confidence subsisted between Mr. Darcy and herself.
She was roused from her seat, and her reflections, by some one's
approach; and before she could strike into another path, she was
and now we are better."
"I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to
Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I find from our uncle and aunt, that
"I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much
"That you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had--not turned
"Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty, and
left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron."
declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business
"You did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may remember
to get rid of him; and unwilling for her sister's sake, to provoke him,
"Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not let us
She held out her hand; he kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though
he hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house.
by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she
The day of his and Lydia's departure soon came, and Mrs. Bennet was
forced to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no means
smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.
the house, "as ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us
but only because her husband's regiment happens to be so far off. If
shortly relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by
looked at Jane, and smiled, and shook her head by turns.
"Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister," (for Mrs.
I care about it, though. He is nothing to us, you know, and I am sure
Meryton last night; I saw her passing by, and went out myself on purpose
to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certain true. He
Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks, just fit to be
report; and I know I appeared distressed. But don't imagine it was from
to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming
In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her
"No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised if I
nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool's errand again."
running after my neighbours every time they go away, and come back
here, I am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon.
husband's incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her
it is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the usual
and fretfulness on her side, might be as long as it could. She counted
enter the paddock, and ride towards the house.
to the window--she looked,--she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down
"Good gracious! Mr. Darcy!--and so it does I vow. Well, any friend of
Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but little
of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness
enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their
mother talked on, of her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be
To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused, and
for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an
interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just, as
coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again,
minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to
her eyes, as she thought for that space of time, that his affection and
She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to
tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any
Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down
again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often command. She
had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He looked serious as usual; and
presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt. It was a painful, but
Bingley, she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period
saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. He was received by Mrs.
especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of
her curtsey and address to his friend.
hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill
Darcy, after enquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did, a question
without bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable
as often found him looking at Jane, as at herself, and frequently on no
object but the ground. More thoughtfulness, and less anxiety to please
and angry with herself for being so.
She was in no humour for conversation with any one but himself; and to
since you went away. Miss Lucas is married and settled. And one of my
seen it in the papers. It was in the Times and the Courier, I know;
It was my brother Gardiner's drawing up too, and I wonder how he came to
Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations. Elizabeth
Newcastle, a place quite northward, it seems, and there they are to
have heard of his leaving the ----shire, and of his being gone into the
done before; and she asked Bingley, whether he meant to make any stay in
"I beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you please, on Mr.
Bennet's manor. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and
found her as handsome as she had been last year; as good natured, and as
difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded
intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at
us, as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you see; and I assure
you, I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep
Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of
Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine
man, on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and
pride of one who had ten thousand a-year.
must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy's behaviour astonished and vexed her.
"Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent," said she,
"He could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt, when
he was in town; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come hither? If
easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by
seen, that on both sides, we meet only as common and indifferent
They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in
humour, and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour's visit, had
On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two,
hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was
bore it with noble indifference, and she would have imagined that
Elizabeth, that if left wholly to himself, Jane's happiness, and his
she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and
and she would, at times, have given any thing to be privileged to tell
the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious and
gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree, that almost made her
The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have
where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee,
the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper,
"The men shan't come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them;
enough to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against herself
himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying,
some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady's whispering
When the tea-things were removed, and the card tables placed, the ladies
all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him, when
mother's rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated
They were confined for the evening at different tables, and she had
others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.
venison was roasted to a turn--and everybody said, they never saw so fat
Lucas's last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged, that the partridges
were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two or three French
a creature as ever lived--and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls,
and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously."
last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy
agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it. I am
greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally
"You are very cruel," said her sister, "you will not let me smile, and
me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make _me_ your
A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. His
ten days time. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably
He should be particularly happy at any time, &c. &c.; and if she would
Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her invitation was
He came, and in such very good time, that the ladies were none of them
gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out,
"My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come--Mr. Bingley is
Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown. Never mind Miss
custom, and Mary went up stairs to her instrument. Two obstacles of the
five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at
Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any
impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last
suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty,
such premeditation, and her intreaty that _she_ would not give into it.
In a few minutes, Mrs. Bennet half opened the door and called out,
soon as she was in the hall. "Kitty and I are going upstairs to sit in
quietly in the hall, till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned
ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their
evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the
mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command
He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he went
away, an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and Mrs.
Bennet's means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband.
Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet spent the
into silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric than the
and in the evening Mrs. Bennet's invention was again at work to get
every body away from him and her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter
sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in
earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of
both as they hastily turned round, and moved away from each other, would
thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either; and
well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a few
pleasure; and instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest
card party, and was sitting up stairs with Kitty.
Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease
previous months of suspense and vexation.
circumspection! of all his sister's falsehood and contrivance! the
father had been short and to the purpose.
He then shut the door, and coming up to her, claimed the good wishes and
affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed her
delight in the prospect of their relationship. They shook hands with
great cordiality; and then till her sister came down, she had to listen
to all he had to say, of his own happiness, and of Jane's perfections;
and in spite of his being a lover, Elizabeth really believed all his
basis the excellent understanding, and super-excellent disposition of
Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and
made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped
though she talked to Bingley of nothing else, for half an hour; and when
Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly shewed
turned to his daughter and said,
Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his
"You are a good girl;" he replied, "and I have great pleasure in
easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will
talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a-year, and very likely
that you should come together. Oh! he is the handsomest young man that
Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty
coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining till after
her; and when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means of
learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again; though we
he really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of _my_ being
This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence, and
of his friend, for, though Jane had the most generous and forgiving
Jane. "Oh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed
happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very
secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Philips, and
formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the
sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up the
lawn. It was too early in the morning for visitors, and besides, the
were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who
the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with him into the
shrubbery. They both set off, and the conjectures of the remaining three
open, and their visitor entered. It was lady Catherine de Bourgh.
astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs.
Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even
head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her
and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds, walking with a young man,
Mrs. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner; and then
"May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left Mr. and
letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.
refreshment; but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely,
declined eating any thing; and then rising up, said to Elizabeth,
"Go, my dear," cried her mother, "and shew her ladyship about the
Elizabeth obeyed, and running into her own room for her parasol,
Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and
drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be decent
Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her
conversation with a woman, who was now more than usually insolent and
"You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my
celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in a cause of such
_know_ it must be a scandalous falsehood; though I would not injure him
with astonishment and disdain, "I wonder you took the trouble of coming
"Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family," said Elizabeth,
reason. But _your_ arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation,
have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family. You
and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns."
Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied,
the union: and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would
inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to
propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say, that from his
"Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is no
kept from it, by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to marry
be censured, slighted, and despised, by every one connected with him.
"Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came here
"I will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My daughter and my
side, from the same noble line; and, on the father's, from respectable,
honourable, and ancient, though untitled families. Their fortune on both
every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them? The
are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of their
"Miss Bennet I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a more
me, would _my_ refusing to accept his hand, make him wish to bestow it
patched-up business, at the expence of your father and uncles. And is
_such_ a girl to be my nephew's sister? Is _her_ husband, is the son of
his late father's steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth!--of what
And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned
"You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew!
claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in
the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world."
concern--and the world in general would have too much sense to join in
Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her
Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.
"She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was prodigiously
She is on her road somewhere, I dare say, and so passing through
and _her_ being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the
set _that_ down, as almost certain and immediate, which _she_ had looked
an application to her nephew; and how _he_ might take a similar
that he thought much higher of her ladyship than _she_ could do; and it
and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning.
seemed likely, the advice and intreaty of so near a relation might
settle every doubt, and determine him at once to be as happy, as dignity
Catherine might see him in her way through town; and his engagement to
understand it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of
have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to regret him
kind of supposition, which had appeased Mrs. Bennet's curiosity; and
father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand.
She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to tell
be from lady Catherine; and she anticipated with dismay all the
She followed her father to the fire place, and they both sat down. He
and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained
"From Mr. Collins! and what can _he_ have to say?"
offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on
her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of her fate,
personages in this land."
mortal can most desire,--splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive
Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur, by a precipitate
woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at _you_ in
to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she and
her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run
business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their
encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should
situation, and his expectation of a young olive-branch. But, Lizzy, you
hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For what do we
live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our
it would have been nothing; but _his_ perfect indifference, and _your_
him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and
To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had
what he said of Mr. Darcy's indifference, and she could do nothing but
visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet had time to
set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to
outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy,
desperate resolution; and perhaps he might be doing the same.
Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern,
moment for her resolution to be executed, and, while her courage was
"Mr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of giving
and emotion, "that you have ever been informed of what may, in a
me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could
not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again,
you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the
affections and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence
Elizabeth feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of
his situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately, though not
very fluently, gave him to understand, that her sentiments had undergone
her receive with gratitude and pleasure, his present assurances. The
felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as
but, though she could not look, she could listen, and he told her of
be thought; and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects. She
soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding
London, and there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the
peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance, in the belief that
acknowledged it to Lady Catherine, frankly and openly."
Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, "Yes, you know enough of
it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me. Your
She explained what its effect on her had been, and how gradually all her
calm and cool, but I am since convinced that it was written in a
of the person who wrote, and the person who received it, are now so
and conceit. Unfortunately an only son, (for many years an only _child_)
particularly, all that was benevolent and amiable,) allowed, encouraged,
almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing, to care for none beyond
_wish_ at least to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with
my own. Such I was, from eight to eight and twenty; and such I might
My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I
in my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I hoped
He then told her of Georgiana's delight in her acquaintance, and of her
before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness
After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know
"What could become of Mr. Bingley and Jane!" was a wonder which
absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had the
to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was
which I had lately made her here; and I was convinced of her affection."
one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not
last winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from him. He was
herself. She remembered that he had yet to learn to be laught at, and it
which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered the room, and
reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her own
acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were silent.
and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather _knew_ that she was happy,
liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a
_dislike_ which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.
"This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on you; and
in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we are
Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more
desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of
must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley's friend and your
husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But
tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know
mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made
and half the night spent in conversation.
other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him?
As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and
shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information;
and he soon afterwards said aloud, "Mr. Bennet, have you no more lanes
"I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty," said Mrs. Bennet, "to walk
to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has
curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently
all for Jane's sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to
him, except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to
would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur
her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the
Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was
be made unhappy, and that it should be through her means, that _she_,
filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her, was a wretched
reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when,
he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while
Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.
explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give;
but they were now necessary, and she assured him with some confusion, of
sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane.
respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband; unless you looked
discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing
Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply;
and at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the
months suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities, she
did conquer her father's incredulity, and reconcile him to the match.
made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow's debts, and got him
and economy. Had it been your uncle's doing, I must and _would_ have
way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow; he will rant and storm about
his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter."
Mr. Collins's letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her
Elizabeth's mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after
thing material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity
and made the important communication. Its effect was most
extraordinary; for on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and
fidget about in her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless
and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages
pleased--so happy. Such a charming man!--so handsome! so tall!--Oh, my
that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh,
This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted: and
thousand a year, and very likely more! 'Tis as good as a Lord! And a
special licence. You must and shall be married by a special licence. But
himself might be; and Elizabeth found, that though in the certain
possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations'
acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising
is my favourite; but I think I shall like _your_ husband quite as well
"My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners--my behaviour
to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke
and looking, and thinking for _your_ approbation alone. I roused, and
took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and
and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly
by all means. My good qualities are under your protection, and you are
to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me
to find occasions for teazing and quarrelling with you as often as may
be; and I shall begin directly by asking you what made you so unwilling
called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you called, did
"Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement."
"How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that
hope, and I was determined at once to know every thing."
Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed?
"My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could, whether I
and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made."
be done, and if you will give me a sheet of paper, it shall be done
"And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you, and
be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find, that her uncle and aunt
had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as
     flight which the subject will afford, and unless you believe me
     soon, and praise him a great deal more than you did in your last. I
     thank you, again and again, for not going to the Lakes. How could I
Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine, was in a different style; and
     you can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has
marriage, were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote even
to Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her
affected; and though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing
insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of
saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her
husband. He bore it however with admirable calmness. He could even
the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all
Mrs. Philips's vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater tax on his
forbearance; and though Mrs. Philips, as well as her sister, stood in
him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep him
to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse
without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising
added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward with delight to
either, to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at
afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley and talked of Mrs. Darcy may be guessed.
lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity in
so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and
Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near
a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to
to Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source
temper as Lydia, and, removed from the influence of Lydia's example, she
became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less
ignorant, and less insipid. From the farther disadvantage of Lydia's
society she was of course carefully kept, and though Mrs. Wickham
frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of
balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.
Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily
she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no
longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters' beauty and her own,
As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from
and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and in spite of every
     so rich, and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will
     much, and I do not think we shall have quite mone